# Empirically validating the common claim that "sex" is "bimodal".  

Before we get into this, I'd like the reader to keep in mind the famous quote by statistician George Box, "All models are wrong, but some are useful". In practice, there are always multiple ways to describe reality, and their validity is relative to the use case. 

The claim that sex is "bimodal" rather than "binary" has become a common talking point as a result of the recognition of sex/gender-diverse groups such as transsexuals, and people born with Differences of Sexual Development (sometimes known as being "intersex"). The purpose of this data analysis is not to litgiate whether sex is "bimodal" or "binary". I argue that this particular disagreement is not an empirical one, but a philosophical one where we differ on what "sex" refers to. For this analysis I will assume that by "sex", the "bimodal" side is refering to the set of biological morphs in humans that exist as a *manifestation* of variance in *latent* reproductive strategies. (on the other hand, the "binary" side of the debate tends to think "sex" refers to the set of reproductive strategies). It is at the very least difficult to objectively litigate this difference in meaning. What we think "sex" actually means depends on our stance on philosophy of language. A Semantic Externalist account of meaning supports the *latent* interpretation. A Semantic Internalist account supports the *manifest* interpretation. Unfortunately there is no consensus in the philosophy of language on these stances, and some skeptics of philisophical discourse might even suggest the choice is entirely arbitrary, tantamoount to arguing about "the meaning of the word 'meaning'". 

So for the sake of investigation let's just adopt the interpretation in support of the "bimodal" side of the debate. Even then, many people will point out that there are no scientific studies directly supporting this claim. It is a claim using statistical language, in the absence of the relevant statistical analysis. This conclusion instead comes from more of a "common-sense" reasoning method. That is, when you have continuous variables that are percieved by people as being highly categorizable into classes, then there is probably a clustering structure in the varibale, and bimodality is a common outcome of bi-clustering structutre. Still, this is not statistically borne out. So in this *exploratory* analysis, I take advantage of public datasets featuring measures of body measurements with subjects classed by "sex", to investigate this claim. Multiple approaches are taken to reflect the multiplicity of interpretations of how to formulate a "manifest-sex" construct. 

1. manifest-sex as a multivariate construct:
     * modelled with a mixture of Multivariate Normals, comparing AIC of 1, 2, and 3, gaussian models.
     * supremacy of 2-gaussian model leans toward supporting to bimodality hypothesis, however this is dependent on the assumption of gaussian components. Additionally, a mixture of two gaussians is not always bimodal. In the single dimensional case, the means of the gaussians must be some distance apart, depending on their variances. (it may be possible to generalize this to the multivariate case. investigation pending) (a skew-normal mixture model would also loosen the distributional assumptions. Pending)
     * Projection in 1-d space is possible, but it had been shown that mixture modelling in PCA reduced dimensions is not always valid with respect to high-dimensional spaces. This may apply to bimodality as well
  
2. manifest-sex as a composite variable (pending):
     * This seperate interpretation would allow us to get away with a dimension reduction by interpreting the construct of interest in terms of the perception induced by the multivariate set. For example, the notion of one man's body being "more masculine" than another man's body, seems to involve a psychological projection or combination of variable onto a single masculinity-femininity dimension. If this is what we would like to capture, this approach may be valid.
     * Data Reduction using PCA and PaCMAP. PCA is the most standard data reduction method across the natural sciences, however some researchers have pointed out how it's imperfect preservation of distances can lead to invalid clustering results in population genetics. Because of this, we'll also user PaCMAP, a newer dimension reduction method with SOTA global and local neighbor distance preservation.
     * once the dimension is reduced, it is trivial to apply Hartigan's Dip Statistic, to assess bimodality without distributional assumptions
